README.md, before:

# mea4_03_rides
##Ride Sharing Platform

## Running the application locally

### Prerequisits

In order to run the application locally you should be able to run the
following technologies:
- maven (https://maven.apache.org/install.html)
- angular (https://angular.io/guide/setup-local)
- mysql (https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/installer/)

- clone the project with HTTPS  
   ```https://github.com/bfhmea4/mea4_03_rides.git```

## How to use a local database:

Make sure you have a database with the correct name and port, as well as username and password as configured in application-local.properties:
according to https://flywaydb.org/documentation/configuration/parameters/
- Username properties: spring.flyway.user, flyway.user, spring.datasource.username
- Password properties: spring.flyway.password, flyway.password, spring.datasource.password
- Database name: spring.flyway.schemas, flyway.schemas
- Location of database (URL): spring.flyway.url, flyway.url, spring.datasource.url
  - example: jdbc:mysql://localhost:[port]/database_name

Change the properties to the values set in the local Database.

Run the following command to migrate the database:
```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:migrate
```

### Running the WebService
- open a command line tool of your choice and navigate to the root folder
of the project "\mea4_03_rides".
- Test if the application is runnable the following command:  
  ```cmd
  mvn install
  ```
- Run the application:  
  ```cmd
  mvn spring-boot:run
  ```
- After the startup the application is runs on port 8080

### Running the Webapp
- open a command line tool of your choice and navigate to the root folder
  of the webbapp "\mea4_03_rides\src\main\ride_sharing_webbapp".
- start the angular application:  
  ```ng serve```
- After the startup the webbapp will run on port 4200
- visit "localhost:4200"

### Making changes

Backend:
If changes are done in the backend, rerun the application in the IDE, the frontend doens't need to be restated

Frontend:
If changes are done in the Frontend, only save the changes with ctrl + s and Angular will rebuild the frontend with websockets
NOTE: If changes are done with npm/ng (e.g. generate a new component with ng generate component [name]) the application needs to be stopped and rerunned with ng      serve

Database:
If changes to the DB are done, e.g. with a new migration file, the backend application has to be stopped and the following commands needs to be executed

```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:migrate
```

NOTE: Please add a new migration file for every change done, this ensures, that data in an older format are still persisted. If there is no alternative and a
migration file has to be changed, use the following commands:

```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:clean
```
```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:migrate
```

This will delete all persisted data!

Run the application to use the changed DB.


## How to start the application using docker:

There is a Docker compose file which builds the application in a container group and starts it:
Build and run the application: 
```cmd
docker compose up
```
Note: It is likely you have to restart the backend container, if the DB image has not yet started, just rerun the image on the Docke GUI or with command
```cmd
docker start -ai ride-sharing-backend
```
visit localhost:4200

To inspect the persisted data: Connect to the DB (image needs to be started) (User: root, Password: changeme), e.g. with MySQL Workbench:
https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/mysql-tutorial/mysql-workbench-installation




### Prerequisits

- clone the project with HTTPS  
   ```https://github.com/bfhmea4/mea4_03_rides.git```

In order to run the application in docker you need to have Docker Desktop (Windows): https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install/ 
/ Docker (Mac, Linux): https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/#installation-methods installed

### Making changes

After making changes in the code you have to remove the current container with the following commands, only the container containing the changes has to be stopped / removed:

```cmd
docker stop ride-sharing-backend
docker stop ride-sharing-frontend
docker stop ride-sharing-mysql
docker rm ride-sharing-backend
docker rm ride-sharing-frontend
docker rm ride-sharing-mysql
```

NOTE: Changes in the DB need to be done in the src/main/db/migration_docker/init.sql file.
After the container is removed, all persisted data will be deleted!

Build and run the application to test the changes made: 
```cmd
docker compose up
```

Commit message:

Adding Authentication in backend.md, Database diagram and testing section

README.md, after:

# mea4_03_rides
##Ride Sharing Platform

## Running the application locally

### Prerequisits

In order to run the application locally you should be able to run the
following technologies:
- maven (https://maven.apache.org/install.html)
- angular (https://angular.io/guide/setup-local)
- mysql (https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/installer/)

- clone the project with HTTPS  
   ```https://github.com/bfhmea4/mea4_03_rides.git```

## How to use a local database:

Make sure you have a database with the correct name and port, as well as username and password as configured in application-local.properties:
according to https://flywaydb.org/documentation/configuration/parameters/
- Username properties: spring.flyway.user, flyway.user, spring.datasource.username
- Password properties: spring.flyway.password, flyway.password, spring.datasource.password
- Database name: spring.flyway.schemas, flyway.schemas
- Location of database (URL): spring.flyway.url, flyway.url, spring.datasource.url
  - example: jdbc:mysql://localhost:[port]/database_name

Change the properties to the values set in the local Database.

Run the following command to migrate the database:
```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:migrate
```

### Running the WebService
- open a command line tool of your choice and navigate to the root folder
of the project "\mea4_03_rides".
- Test if the application is runnable the following command:  
  ```cmd
  mvn install
  ```
- Run the application:  
  ```cmd
  mvn spring-boot:run
  ```
- After the startup the application is runs on port 8080

### Running the Webapp
- open a command line tool of your choice and navigate to the root folder
  of the webbapp "\mea4_03_rides\src\main\ride_sharing_webbapp".
- start the angular application:  
  ```ng serve```
- After the startup the webbapp will run on port 4200
- visit "localhost:4200"

### Making changes

Backend:
If changes are done in the backend, rerun the application in the IDE, the frontend doens't need to be restated

Frontend:
If changes are done in the Frontend, only save the changes with ctrl + s and Angular will rebuild the frontend with websockets
NOTE: If changes are done with npm/ng (e.g. generate a new component with ng generate component [name]) the application needs to be stopped and rerunned with ng      serve

Database:
If changes to the DB are done, e.g. with a new migration file, the backend application has to be stopped and the following commands needs to be executed

```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:migrate
```

NOTE: Please add a new migration file for every change done, this ensures, that data in an older format are still persisted. If there is no alternative and a
migration file has to be changed, use the following commands:

```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:clean
```
```cmd
mvn clean -Dflyway.configFiles=src/main/resources/application-local.properties flyway:migrate
```

This will delete all persisted data!

Run the application to use the changed DB.


## How to start the application using docker:

There is a Docker compose file which builds the application in a container group and starts it: [docker-compose](docker-compose.yml)

Build and run the application: 
```cmd
docker compose up
```
Note: It is likely you have to restart the backend container, if the DB image has not yet started, just rerun the image on the Docke GUI or with command
```cmd
docker start -ai ride-sharing-backend
```
visit localhost:4200

To inspect the persisted data: Connect to the DB (image needs to be started) (User: root, Password: changeme), e.g. with MySQL Workbench:
https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/mysql-tutorial/mysql-workbench-installation




### Prerequisits

- clone the project with HTTPS  
   ```https://github.com/bfhmea4/mea4_03_rides.git```

In order to run the application in docker you need to have Docker Desktop (Windows): https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install/ 
/ Docker (Mac, Linux): https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/#installation-methods installed

### Making changes

After making changes in the code you have to remove the current container with the following commands, only the container containing the changes has to be stopped / removed:

```cmd
docker stop ride-sharing-backend
docker stop ride-sharing-frontend
docker stop ride-sharing-mysql
docker rm ride-sharing-backend
docker rm ride-sharing-frontend
docker rm ride-sharing-mysql
```

NOTE: Changes in the DB need to be done in the src/main/db/migration_docker/init.sql file.
After the container is removed, all persisted data will be deleted!

Build and run the application to test the changes made: 
```cmd
docker compose up
```

### Testing

There are some unit tests covering the most important functions and processes for the application.
If you want to add new tests add them in src/test/java under the corresponding object. 

To run the unit tests, which call the service directly:

```cmd
mvn test
```
